 The new GST reforms mark a major step toward lowering the tax burden on essential goods and
 services. These new rates will stimulate demand, boost competitiveness, and create new opportunities
 for growth and employment in the country. For Sikkim, a small Himalayan state with stakes in
 pharmaceuticals, tourism, and organic food products, the new GST reforms could not have come at a
 better time. The tax cuts align with Sikkim’s broader development goals, from industrial
 diversification to tourism promotion and uplifting rural livelihoods.

 Lower GST rates will make Sikkim’s key sectors more cost-competitive, encouraging higher demand
 and wider market reach. These reforms will strengthen local livelihoods, expand exports, and support
 Sikkim’s economic growth

 Tourism industry is essential for Sikkim’s economy with various hotels, homestays, travel agencies,
 taxi operators, guides, and eateries supporting local income and jobs. An estimated 7.8 lakh people
 derive their livelihoods from this sector. Key destinations like Kanchenjunga National Park,
 Lachen, Lachung, and Yumthang Valley continue to attract increasing numbers of visitors. Gangtok
 has even been recognized by the Government of India as the “Safest Tourist Destination”.
 With the reformed GST rates, hotel accommodation up to ₹7,500 per night now carries only 5%
 GST. A reduced tax rate essentially puts money back in tourists’ pockets, encouraging higher
 occupancy and longer stays. Higher hotel occupancy also translates to more jobs in this sector.
 Another game-changing tax cut is the reduction of GST on “beauty and wellness” services from
 18% to 5%. This might, on the surface, seem less directly relevant to tourism, but in Sikkim it is
 highly synergistic. The state is known for its wellness tourism sector and is home to numerous
 traditional and herbal medicinal centres. With only 5% GST now, wellness tourism packages have
 become significantly cheaper.

 Encouraging tourism via tax relief will help Sikkim diversify its economy further and uplift rural
 areas. A rise in tourist arrivals will not only increase state GST collections through higher volume but
 also boost related sectors like transport (vehicle rentals), agriculture (demand for local organic
 produce), and handicrafts (souvenir sales).

 Sikkim has emerged as a pharmaceutical manufacturing hub with over 50 pharmaceutical
 companies, including industry giants like Sun Pharma, Cipla, Zydus Cadila, and others, clustered
 mainly in East Sikkim. Pharmaceuticals sector has thus, become a significant employer in the
 State.

 The GST reforms abolish or sharply reduce taxes on medicines and medical devices, lowering costs
 across the pharmaceutical supply chain. In particular, 30 cancer drugs are fully GST-free (down
 from 12%) and GST on all other drugs and medicines is cut from 12% to 5%. Likewise, most
 medical and surgical devices along with thermometers and medical apparatus, etc. now attract
 only 5% GST. This translates to a 7-13% lower tax load. This magnitude of cost savings will
 improve healthcare affordability with medicines now being notably cheaper.

 A big gain for Sikkim’s pharma producers will be in export competitiveness and market
 expansion. Drug formulations, biologicals and medical & scientific instruments account for roughly
 63% of the state’s total exports, reaching markets in Europe, the Middle East, Nepal and Japan.
 Now, with only a 5% to Nil GST on these items, exporters from Sikkim will have a lighter tax burden
 to manage. The cost of production would effectively drop, allowing these items to be priced more
 competitively in international markets.

 Sikkim’s Temi estate’s tea is widely sought after in international markets such as USA, Germany, UK
 and Japan. The estate is modest in size with around 450 workers and small producers, but its
 impact is significant in terms of brand value and rural livelihood in Namchi district.

 Under the previous tax regime, packaged and instant teas were taxed at 18% GST. The GST reform
 has now reduced this to just 5%. This effectively brings a 13-percentage point cut in tax,
 translating to around 11% drop in final consumer prices.

 For Temi Tea, which has been expanding its domestic retail presence, the 5% GST means it can
 penetrate more markets with better pricing. The export potential of Sikkim’s tea could also see
 strong benefits with the fall in prices. For the workers and small growers, the GST cut offers better
 earnings.

 Sikkim is home to a diverse food processing ecosystem. Bakery, snacks, and confectionery items are
 produced in Pakyong, whereas, Soreng is known for its meat-based products. Mangan is renowned
 for large cardamom, while Gangtok produces the famous Dalley Khorsani chilli, a GI-tagged product.
	
 The recent GST reforms significantly improve cost competitiveness by reducing the tax rate on
 key items. Pickles, fruit and vegetable juices now attract just 5% GST instead of 12%, while products
 such as pastries, cakes, soups, and broths have seen reductions from 18% to 5%. These reforms
 directly lower shelf prices by 6-13%, stimulating higher consumer demand. This will further
 encourage higher fruit-to-factory procurement during peak seasons.

 This sector is driven by 1300+ enterprises supported under the Pradhan Mantri Formalisation
 of Micro Food Processing Enterprises (PMFME) Scheme. These units are involved in the
 processing of flour, tea, fruits, bakery goods, and other food products, including products like pickles
 and paste from Dalley Khorsani, bamboo shoot pickle etc. With increase in demand, production
 will increase which will lead to higher employment.

 By easing the tax burden on Sikkim’s key economic sectors, the new GST reforms will act as a
 catalyst for holistic development of the state’s economy. As these reforms take hold, their effects can be witnessed through a pharma plant dispatching an
 extra batch of medicines, a line of happy tourists extending their stay in a Gangtok hotel, workers at
 Temi Tea Estate celebrating increased orders, or women at a village cooperative doubling their pickle
 production to meet new demand. Together, the new GST reforms are set to drive more affordable products, stronger exports, and
 greater job opportunities in Sikkim.